Add guide post: Personalize your gitpod workspace environment (#2410)
gitpod-io/website: src/routes/blog/personalize-your-gitpod-workspace-environment.md

---
author: nancy-chauhan, Siddhant-K-code, loujaybee
date: Thursday, 13 July 2022 11:00:00 UTC
title: Personalize your Gitpod Workspace Environments
slug: personalize-your-gitpod-workspace-environment
excerpt: With Gitpod, switching to remote development becomes frictionless 🚀 You Can personalize your Gitpod workspaces as you configure your IDE Settings & Custom dotfiles.
teaserImage: header.png
image: teaser.png
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

> We know how important it is for you to customize and perfect your development environment—tweaking the keyboard shortcuts, changing theme colors, installing extensions etc into your IDE. You might want the [Dracula theme](https://draculatheme.com/), [Bracket Pair Colorizer](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=CoenraadS.bracket-pair-colorizer-2), [FiraCode](https://github.com/tonsky/FiraCode) for beautiful font ligatures or configure your VS Code to use spaces instead of tabs etc. Or you might prefer using your favourite JetBrains IDE or vim ( emacs too is good 😛 ). And finally, you would always love to have your installation scripts and Dotfiles handy to customize your developer environment further.

Reviewer: **Thought:** "Emacs too is good" feels like a tongue-twister 👅  might be better re-worded as: "we love you too, Emacs", or "no offence, Emacs"  or something?

> We know how important it is for you to customize and perfect your development environment—tweaking the keyboard shortcuts, changing theme colors, installing extensions etc into your IDE. You might want the [Dracula theme](https://draculatheme.com/), [Bracket Pair Colorizer](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=CoenraadS.bracket-pair-colorizer-2), [FiraCode](https://github.com/tonsky/FiraCode) for beautiful font ligatures or configure your VS Code to use spaces instead of tabs etc. Or you might prefer using your favourite JetBrains IDE or vim ( emacs too is good 😛 ). And finally, you would always love to have your installation scripts and Dotfiles handy to customize your developer environment further.

Reviewer 2: I think Bracket-Pair-Colorizer is built into VS Code so technically no need to install the extension [[1](https://code.visualstudio.com/blogs/2021/09/29/bracket-pair-colorization)]. Not sure if its relevant for this post, just a sidenote

With Gitpod, switching to remote development becomes frictionless 🚀 You can personalize your Gitpod workspaces as you configure your IDE Settings, custom dotfiles and IDE/editor of your choice. Gitpod helps you to get the best of both worlds - Ephemeral workspaces and Personalization consistent across all Gitpod dev environments.✨

# VS Code Settings Sync 🔁

> [Settings Sync](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/settings-sync) in VS Code lets you always work on with your favorite editor setup by sharing your VS Code configuration such as settings, keybindings, and installed extensions across your machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Settings Sync](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/settings-sync) in VS Code lets you always work with your favorite editor setup by sharing your VS Code configuration such as settings, keybindings, and installed extensions across your machines.
```

While working with Gitpod, you start a new workspace for every task. With Settings Sync, you can avoid resetting your environment for each new workspace 🧡

> ## Getting started with Settings Sync

Reviewer: **Suggestion:** Since the getting started steps are actually nested under the header below, maybe we could remove this and let the content sit with the paragraphs above? 

```suggestion
```

> For VS Code in the browser, Gitpod, by default, enables the Settings Sync, where Settings Sync keeps polling the backend to ensure your settings are stored, which gets pushed to the Gitpod's server after the first sync. You can learn more about personalizing your workspace in this [video](https://www.gitpod.io/screencasts/personalise-your-workspace).

Reviewer: **Suggestion:** Break into two sentences, for readability. 

```suggestion
For VS Code in the browser Gitpod enables Settings Sync by default. Settings Sync keeps polling the backend to ensure your settings are stored, which gets pushed to the Gitpod's server after the first sync. You can learn more about personalizing your workspace in this [video](https://www.gitpod.io/screencasts/personalise-your-workspace).
```

> ## How to Configure Settings Sync in Desktop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Getting Started with Settings Sync in VS Code Desktop
```

`youtube: wMW2JrCqVA4`

> - Step 1: Install and enable the [Gitpod extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=gitpod.gitpod-desktop).

Reviewer: **Question:** Any reason to not use a list element in favour of explicitly writing the step and number, e.g. "step 1:"? I don't have a strong opinion here, but personally bias to list elements for [semantic reasons](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html5_semantic_elements.asp), e.g :

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5528307/179000323-876a67dc-a241-4fe1-aa70-40019b76bb9a.png)

- Step 2: Using the [Command Palette](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/ux-guidelines/command-palette) select: "Settings Sync: Enable signing in with Gitpod".
  With this your preferences will be stored in Gitpod’s server.
- Step 3: Restart your VS Code Desktop application.

>   > Note: Try hard stopping or forcefully killing VS Code for changes to take effect

Reviewer 3: I think we can make it as Bold text `**Important**`

>   > Note: Try hard stopping or forcefully killing VS Code for changes to take effect

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  > **Important:** You must entirely close VS Code Desktop for changes to take effect.
```

- Step 4: Enable Settings Sync from the Manage gear menu at the bottom of the Activity Bar. Authenticate with Gitpod to enable settings sync.

> You can read more about this in detail in our [documentation section](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/ides-and-editors/settings-sync).

Reviewer: **Suggestion**: When using "this", it helps to make sure the subject is always present (or better swap it out entirely) e.g. "read more about this **feature**", or "read more about setting sync". 

**Nitpick**: Not sure if this is a well-known best practice (I haven't looked), but I often try to align the text that is linking with the text of the header of the linked page. e.g. swapping "check out [our docs] for x thing" to "check out our docs for [x thing]" where instead we can link directly on the word which is also the title of the linked page. 

```suggestion
Read more in the [VS Code Setting Sync](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/ides-and-editors/settings-sync) documentation.
```

# Dotfiles

> Dotfiles is a collective name for a user's configuration files. As with any configuration file, these are used to customize your environment according to personal requirements. Customizing your `git` environment using the `.gitconfig` file or your bash/ zsh shell using the `.bashrc` file or `.zshrc` file, respectively or your `vim` editor using `.vimrc`, all these are done using dotfiles. These can also be fully functional scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dotfiles are a collective name for a user's configuration files. As with any configuration file, these are used to customize your environment according to personal requirements. Customizing your `git` environment using the `.gitconfig` file or your bash/ zsh shell using the `.bashrc` file or `.zshrc` file, respectively or your `vim` editor using `.vimrc`, all these are done using dotfiles. These can also be fully functional scripts.
```

> We can configure Dotfiles in Gitpod [Preferences](https://gitpod.io/preferences), which will get loaded for every new workspace. You can also configure your workspace with a `.gitpod.yml` file located at the root of your project. `.gitpod.yml` is used to prepare the dev environment for your project. It is a project-specific file that you check into the root of your repository. On the other hand, dotfiles are personal to you & they contain all your config settings and preferences that can be consistent and reused across all Gitpod workspaces.

Reviewer: **Suggestion:** Split apart the first paragraph about how to configure dotfiles from the statement after about disambiguation with `.gitpod.yml`.

**Suggestion:** The phrasing "you can also" before talking about `.gitpod.yml` almost sounds like the `.gitpod.yml` is a substitute or alternative to dotfiles (especially when introduced in the context of a dotfiles section), whereas the features are for different purposes (as you note at the end of the paragraph). Since the `gitpod.yml` is a much more important / relevant feature than dotfiles, I'd suggest to flip these so it's more clear about the difference between the two features. 

**Suggestion**: We also mention "root of the repository" twice. 

```suggestion
Configure Dotfiles in Gitpod [Preferences](https://gitpod.io/preferences) to be loaded on every new workspace. 

Dotfiles is not to be confused with the `.gitpod.yml`. Dotfiles are personal to you & they contain all your config settings and preferences that can be consistent and reused across all Gitpod workspaces. Whereas `.gitpod.yml` is used to prepare the dev environment for your project. It is a project-specific file that you check into the root of your repository. 
```

> > Note: You should not necessarily use dotfiles to install heavy applications & libraries and instead use Dockerfiles to leverage the [build cache](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/dockerfile_best-practices/#leverage-build-cache). You can configure custom docker image for your project and can read more about it from [here](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker).

Reviewer: 😍

> ## How Do Dotfiles Work in Gitpod Workspace?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How Do Dotfiles Work in a Gitpod Workspace?
```

</figure>

When you create a new Gitpod workspace, it looks in your [preferences](https://gitpod.io/preferences) to get your dotfiles repository address. The repository is then cloned to your new workspace as `.dotfiles` in the `$HOME` directory. Then it searches for [executable](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-dotfiles#:~:text=Make%20sure%20to%20make%20your%20installation%20script%20executable%20with%20chmod%20755%20%3Cinstall%2Dscript%2Dname%3E.sh%20before%20committing%20and%20pushing%20to%20your%20dotfiles%20repository.) scripts like `install.sh`, `bootstrap.sh`, and [so on](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-dotfiles#:~:text=following%20install%20scripts). From a high-level perspective, your dotfiles are synchronously set up before Gitpod starts to deal with its `.gitpod.yml` [start tasks](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-start-tasks).

This procedure will be repeated each time you create a new Gitpod Workspace. Refer to our [docs](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-dotfiles) to learn more about how Gitpod deals with your dotfiles.

> ## How to configure Dotfiles in Gitpod

Reviewer: Suggest swapping for "getting started" language, as it seems more appropriate to what's listed below?

```suggestion
## Getting started with Dotfiles in Gitpod
```

<p align="center">
    <iframe width="640" height="360" src="https://www.loom.com/embed/d7185cfb6ca54fdeb521073057dc2715" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen allowfullscreen></iframe>
</p>

> In the video, we are installing & configuring the [`deno`](https://deno.land/) in our Gitpod Workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the video, we are installing & configuring the [`deno`](https://deno.land/) runtime in our Gitpod Workspace.
```

> <p align="center">
>     <iframe width="640" height="360" src="https://www.loom.com/embed/d7185cfb6ca54fdeb521073057dc2715" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen allowfullscreen></iframe>
> </p>
> 
> In the video, we are installing & configuring the [`deno`](https://deno.land/) in our Gitpod Workspace.

Reviewer: **Suggestion**: Explain the purpose of the video before showing, e.g. bring the text above the video. 

```suggestion

The following video shows an example of how to setup Dotfiles, by configuring [`deno`](https://deno.land/) in our Gitpod Workspace.

<p align="center">
    <iframe width="640" height="360" src="https://www.loom.com/embed/d7185cfb6ca54fdeb521073057dc2715" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen allowfullscreen></iframe>
</p>
```

> Note: Your installation script should be executable. Enter `chmod 755 <install-script-name>.sh` before committing and pushing it to your dotfiles repository.

Reviewer: **Thought:** Should this be a callout box? 

```suggestion
> **Note:** Your installation script should be executable. Enter `chmod 755 <install-script-name>.sh` before committing and pushing it to your dotfiles repository.
```

> - Step 1: You have to add the URL of your dotfiles repository in [`/preferences`](https://gitpod.io/preferences)
> - Step 2: After saving your configuration, all your dotfiles will be configured automatically from the next time you create a new Gitpod Workspace.

Reviewer: **Suggestion:** Step 2 is only "save" as a step, the second part is the conclusion, so I suggest to break to a new line. 

```suggestion
- Step 1: Add the URL of your dotfiles repository in [`/preferences`](https://gitpod.io/preferences)
- Step 2: Save the configuration

All your dotfiles will be configured automatically from the next time you create a new Gitpod Workspace.
```

> # IDEs & Editor

Reviewer: Logically, it might make sense to introduce this section first, or at least before VS Code Settings Sync, which is specific to only one of those editors. 

**For context:** We're still actively still trying to avoid the mis-interpretation that Gitpod is VS Code only.

- [Command-line-based](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/ides-and-editors/command-line) editors such as Vim

<figure>
<video playsinline autoplay no-controls loop muted class="shadow-medium w-full rounded-xl max-w-3xl mt-x-small" alt="Updating Gitpod IDE preferences to {title}" src="/images/editors/select-jetbrains-ide.mp4"></video>
    <figcaption style="text-align: center;" >Updating Gitpod IDE preferences to choose IDE/editor of your choice</figcaption>
</figure>

To configure a specific IDE or editor of your choice for all new workspaces,

- Step 1: You will need to update your [user preferences](https://gitpod.io/preferences).
- Step 2: For changes to get reflected, you have to restart a workspace. To read more about this in detail, you can refer to the following [doc](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/ides-and-editors).

## Power of customization

Customizing the settings and tools to your preferences and workflows is an important step when using any development environment. Let us know how personalizing your Gitpod workspace environment makes you more productive by [joining our community](https://www.gitpod.io/community) ✨

> If you have any questions, drop by our community [Discord server](https://discord.com/invite/gitpod).

Reviewer: Love the community + feedback call to action 🚀 😍
